this segment contains sensitive imagery
please watch with care Trudeau someone's
going to make you catch a bullet one day
I advocate Civil War if people don't
want to stand up we've got guns we'll
stand up and we'll bring them out I've
been studying conspiracy theories for 25
years more and more you're seeing some
of these movements quite quickly pushing
everyday people who weren't even deeply
immersed in these mil tip over into
violence and that's been striking to see
under his name online is a racist
Manifesto claiming that white Christians
are under threat from other religions
and races he also cites Mass Shooters
like Canadian Alexandre banet let's
unravel atomization and political
instability farri right violence is
destabilizing politics and Public Safety
across the globe and increasingly
unaffiliated acts of extremism are a
growing concern serious injuries along
the if you think about the Quebec mosque
attacker if you think about the London
Ontario attacker they weren't part of of
any organizations a lot of these guys
are consuming content online or in
person with a whole host of
organizations and a whole host of
movements but they're never actually
joining anything this is what Barbara
Perry calls
atomization people who don't join hate
groups they're kind of isolated but
consume hate content and then act on it
in potentially lethal ways and a heated
political climate fueled by
disinformation and exclusionary policies
is driving the increase in this kind of
reactionary violence this notion of
group membership is becoming less
important yes there are still active
groups out there but we're seeing also
the movement is now drawing more and
more unaffiliated individuals so those
that are willing to act on these hateful
narratives in a way that endangers
others or even is destructive of
properties that willingness to engage in
violence is one of the characters
they're all kind of hanging out in the
same spaces now they're all consuming
the same content what they're doing is
weaving these IDE theologies and these
narratives and these messages together
for themselves to suit their needs
whether it's trying to explain their own
grievances their own situations or a
broader cultural sense of malays what's
happening around them in in many
respects that's even more frightening to
have you know these atomized individuals
uh what I call networked individuals
circulating out there they're harder to
detect and they're harder than to
prevent for the actual attacks by imve
actors they're still doing a lot of
self- financing lowlevel lowcost attacks
and this is very likely in part because
our counter terorist financing policies
have been somewhat effective at driving
actress to those types of lowcost
attacks the easiest way for people to
independently access the far-right
network is online and Canadians have
been highly active on Niche and
mainstream platforms which only
accelerated during the pandemic in
little over a year we tracked over
170,000 individual searches for imve
content across Canada as Canadians spent
more time online as a result of the
covid-19 pandemics engagement increased
searches for farri right content
increased 19% weekly during lockdown
measures in Ottawa we tracked a 35%
increase after Ontario's state of
emergency was declared Canadians are
also prolific in far-right content
creation this 2021 report found that
Canadian users on social media were
churning out an average of 61,000 pieces
of content per week and while the number
of far-right extremists on these
platforms is relatively small they're
still able to generate a sizable
reaction from the public according to
the institute for strategic dialogue so
it's easy for people to come across
networks of hate online Canadians are
very active in the online farri right
space and these Canadian users are not
just keeping it Canadian farri
organizers in Canada are also Making
Waves in places like the United States
we're seeing Canadians not just become
these major farri actors in their own
home country of Canada but also leaving
that country via the online space
interacting with our right discourses in
other countries sometimes they even
leave the country in person this is a
moment where we're seeing a very
worrying blending of disinformation
narratives and violent extremist
narratives there are some of these
narratives that have been pushed heavily
by violent extremist groups over the
last several years and then we're now
starting to see the mass movement of
disinformation and conspiracy theory
narratives Freedom Convoy did not start
off as a farri uh organization a farri
protest but ended up very fast being
co-opted by farri groups you may
remember the 2022 trucker Convoy which
brought together an unexpected
cross-section of people who were exposed
to many ideas they may not otherwise
have come
across the occupation of downtown Ottawa
resulted in widespread anti-government
opposition that galvanized disperate
groups and atomized
individuals it was a very unique chapter
in Canadian history to see that much
solidarity across groups groups like
Diagon I think even elements of lamut
who are still strling Canada first
Canada proud uh those sorts of groups
yeah very very active during Co and very
good at exploiting popular anxieties
popular fears popular grievances to
bring people into the fold as well it's
become it's comical it's like it's a
comical level of absurdity now I think I
think a lot of Canadians are getting red
pilled right now too the the Convoy was
sort of the epitome of them coming
together to build a very powerful
Coalition it increased their own sense
of solidarity but it was also important
as a message that they were a forc to be
reckoned with that anti-government
messaging is especially worrying as we
head into a more polarized political
landscape with anger towards the federal
government pulling at a new high all of
us want to live in conditions of safety
and reduced violence that means thinking
about how we can create the social
conditions that can challenge white
supremacy we have a presidential
election coming uh up South of the
Border depending on who gets elected in
the primaries and what presidential
candidates will be kind of Center Stage
will largely sway our farri organizers
in Canada in the last five six years
that's something has really come to the
four not just resistance but hostility
towards the federal government
especially I've not seen any anything
like that in the Canadian context the
virent condemnation of the government as
a whole the risk of that of course is
that it moves Beyond just distrust in
the current government to a distrust in
the political process generally it's a
real threat a real risk to democratic
processes